+++
date = "2016-03-31T12:00:00Z"
title = "TLD - Top Level Disaster"

+++

Anyone with an internet connection can't help to have noticed all the new TLDs
(Top Level Domains) that have appeared over the last few years. Instead of
`pets.com` you can now have `pets.online`, or `pets.buy`, or `pet.store`. Is
this better? Well, yes and no.

Introducing new TLDs was a *massive* opportunity and could have been a big step
forward for domain naming, but in practice it's been a painful disaster. ICANN
in what I can only assume was greed, decided that instead of doing some public
consultation and then introducing a set of new, useful, and reasonably priced
TLDS, that instead it would be better to introduce a few (mostly crappy) new
TLDs, and then let third parties bid to purchase entire TLDs of their own,
essentially privatising domain names.

The result? Instead of cheap and useful selection of publically available TLDs
such as `.wiki`, `.forum`, `.chat`, and `.blog`. We now have a bunch of niche
TLDs such as `.accountant`, `.loan`, `.insurance`, `.london`, and branded ones
such as `.bing`, `.google`, `.microsoft`, and `.apple`.

Who gains? Well, very few people really. Let's take an obvious example of what
a useful domain would have been: `minecraft.wiki`. It's descriptive and clean.
And oh look, registration only costs £15/year. Well, not quite. See, that
particular TLD is controlled by [Top Level Design](http://toplevel.design) who
bought control of the entire TLD from ICANN. And so they can do what they like
with it, such as placing specific domains like `minecraft.wiki` on a "premium
domains list", and instead charging £1,600/year for it. Want to know which
domains are on that list? ~~You're probably out of luck, I've not found the list.~~
Update: I emailed Top Level Design. They've not published the list yet, but
they're looking into it.

Who gains now? Well, Curse, the company hosting the minecraft wiki don't. The
users don't, as it's not worth switching for *that much*. The only people who
gain are the companies who bought out the entire TLDs. ICANN has taken the
annoyance of domain squatting and given the squatters a nuclear arsenal.

One company owns the `.sucks` TLD. Want to stop someone making `brandname.sucks`
and tarnishing your brand? That's £200/year. Just a little tax by a random third
party to avoid the embarassment. Who gains? Well, only the comapany controlling
the TLD. Everyone else gets taxed.

Branded TLDs such as `.google` have some marginal perceivable benefit, but they
really weren't needed. I've not actually seen one used since they were sold. So
why bother at all?

Why has the TLD namespace been polluted with cash grabs and brand names? Useful
and affordable TLDs just like `.wiki` should have been the cornerstone of
ICANN's new TLD campaign. We could have had a wide selection of useful TLDs,
but several years later all we really have is `yet-another-trendy-site.io`. A
missed opportunity, and a great shame.

One last thing...  How on earth did no think to create a `.js` TLD? We could've
turned the fad of naming javascript libraries `something-trendy.js` into URLs
themselves.
